# DatetimeJS

This is a shameless (or perhaps shameful) imitation of Python's
[datetime](http://docs.python.org/2/library/datetime.html) library for
JavaScript. It provides methods for creating, comparing, formatting and parsing
dates and times.

 + [Motivation](#motivation)
 + [Installation](#installation)
 + [Basic usage](#basic-usage)
 + [API reference](#api-reference)
   - [`datetime.datetime`](#api-datetime)
   - [`datetime.dtdelta`](#api-dtdelta)
   - [`datetime.format`](#api-format)
   - [`datetime.parse`](#api-parse)
   - [`datetime.utils`](#api-utils)
 + [Variables](#const)
   - [`ISO_FORMAT`](#const-isoformat)
 + [Formatting tokens](#formatting-tokens)
 + [Parsing tokens](#parsing-tokens)
 + [Running unit tests](#running-unit-tests)
 + [Known issues](#known-issues)
 + [Reporting bugs](#reporting-bugs)


## Motivation <a name="motivation"></a>

This library existed a bit longer than it may seem from commit logs and other
information. It has been sitting on my hard drive much longer than some of the
other libraries out there that provide things like strftime formatting.
Unfortunately, I have not released it until now because I was rather busy with
other things. It just so happened that I had time on my hands, so I decided to
polish and release this.

Another reason is that I have started to use MomentJS, and I hated it with
passion. There are many reasons why strftime formatting is great, and habit is
not even the first reason that comes to mind. Without going further into
philosophical discussion, I consider strftime formatting to be superior and I
want to use it in JavaScript. Period.


## Installation <a name="installation"></a>

The `datetime.js` module is in UMD format, and it is usable in both the
browsers and NodeJS. It has no external dependencies.

On Node, you can install using NPM:

    npm install datetimejs

For browsers, you can simply add it using a `<script>` tag or `require` it as 
you normally do if you use RequireJS and similar AMD loaders.

It is also installable with [volo](http://volojs.org/):

    volo add foxbunny/datetimejs


## Basic usage <a name="basic-usage"></a>

Since the juicy bit is strftime formatting, let's see an example of that first.

    var dt = require('datetime');  // if you need to
    var date = new Date(2014, 4, 12, 14, 0, 0);
    dt.strftime(date, 'The year is %Y, around %i %p on %b %d');
    // returns 'The year is 2014, around 2 p.m. on May 12'

Ideally, we would be able parse using the same formatting string and the result
we've got from `#strftime()`, but that's just not possible right now. So we'll
go easy with a slightly more reasonable example.

    date = '9/2/2013 11:45 a.m.'
    dt.strptime(date, '%n/%D/%Y %i:%M %p');
    // Returns Date object for Mon Sep 02 2013 11:45:00

But formatting and parsing isn't all. How about finding out the difference in
time between two `Date` objects?

    // Wrapping it in immmediate-execution for people who are 
    // trying this in a shell.
    (function() {
        date = new Date();
        setTimeout(function() {
            var date1 = new Date();
            var delta = dt.datetime.delta(date, date1)
            console.log('Took me ' + delta.seconds + ' seconds');    
        }, 5400);
    }());
    // Will eventually print 'Took me 6 seconds'

Or maybe you don't need an exact delta. You only need to know if something is
before or after?

    var date = new Date(2013, 6, 12);
    var date1 = new Date(2013, 6, 15);
    dt.datetime.isAfter(date, date1); // false
    dt.datetime.isBefore(date, date1); // true

Sorting dates is also quite easy:

    dt.datetime.reorder(
        new Date(2013, 6, 12),
        new Date(2013, 4, 10),
        new Date(2013, 5, 15)
    );
    // returns [Date(2013, 4, 10), Date(2013, 5, 15), Date(2013, 6, 12)]


## API reference <a name="api-reference"></a>

The `datetime.js` module is organized into several submodules. These are:

 + `datetime.datetime` - `Date` object creation and manipulaton
 + `datetime.dtdelta` - Date- and time-difference-related methods
 + `datetime.format` - Date and time formatting
 + `datetime.parse` - Date and time parsing
 + `datetime.utils` - Utility functions


### `datetime.datetime`

This submodule contains methods for creating and manipulating `Date` objects.


#### `#clone(d)` <a name="api-clone"></a>

Creates a new `Date` object that has identical date and time to `d`.


#### `#addDays(d, v)` <a name=="api-adddays"></a>

Adds `v` number of days to `d` `Date` object and returns a new instance. `v`
can be either positive or negative. To remove days, simply pass a negative
value. Note that this crosses month and year boundaries, so adding `365` days
to a `Date` object will forward that object by approximately one year. This
does not take into account leap years, though, so you should use
[`#addYears()`](#api-addyears) instead.


#### `#addMonths(d, v)` <a name="api-addmonths"></a>

Adds `v` number of months to `d` `Date` object and returns a new instance. `v`
can be either positive or negative. This method will also change the year if
needed. For eample, adding 12 month will forward the date by one year.


#### `#addYears(d, v)` <a name="api-addyears"></a>

Adds `v` years to `d` `Date` object. `v` can either be positive or negative.


#### `resetTime(d)` <a name="api-resettime"></a>

Resets the hours, minutes, seconds, and milliseconds to 0 and returns a new
instance.


#### `#today()` <a name="api-today"></a>

Returns a `Date` object that represents today's date with time part reset to 0.


#### `#thisMonth()` <a name="api-thismonth"></a>

Returns a `Date` object that represents the first day of current month.


#### `#thisWeek()` <a name="api-thisweek"></a>

Returns a `Date` object that represents the first day of current week. This
method will use the [`WEEK_START`](#const-weekstart) variable to determine what
day the week starts on.


#### `#toUTC(d)` <a name="api-toutc"></a>

Since JavaScript's date and time API does not really provide means for
manipulating time zones, this method provides an ugly hack to get the UTC time
for a given `Date` object. It simply shifts the date by the offset of the date
object and returns an instance that is in local time, but has date and time
shifted so it represents the same values as the UTC time zone.


### `datetime.dtdelta` <a name="api-dtdelta"></a>

This module contains methods for working with date and time differences.

Please note that in comparison methods like [`#isBefore()`](#api-isbefore) or
[`#isAfter()`](#api-isafter), the first argument is always the value we want to
test, and the other arguments are reference values. 

    datetime.dtdelta.isBefore(a, b);
    // 'Is a before b?'

    datetime.dtdelta.isBeteween(a, b, c);
    // 'Is a between b and c?'


#### `#delta(d1, d2)` <a name="api-delta"></a>

Calculates the difference between two `Date` objects and returns a delta
object. The delta object has the following structure:

    d.delta // relative difference
    d.milliseconds // total absolute difference in milliseconds
    d.seconds // total absolute difference in seconds (rounded up)
    d.minutes // total absolute difference in minutes (rounded up)
    d.hours // total absolute difference in hours (rounded up)
    d.days // total absolute difference in days (rounded up)
    d.composite // composite absolute difference

The `delta` key is the same as performing `d2 - d1` (and that is how it's
obtained).

'Relative difference' means the difference between `d1` and `d2` relative to
`d1`. This can be a negative or positive number in milliseconds. All other
values (including the `milliseconds` key) are absolute, which means they are
always positive.

The composite difference is an array containing the total difference broken
down into days, hours, minutes, seconds, and milliseconds.


#### `#reorder(d, [d1, d2...])` <a name="api-reorder"></a>

Reorders the `Date` objects passed as arguments from the oldest to newest. This
method takes any number of arguments, and does not take arrays.

If you want to pass an array, you can simply apply `#reorder()`:

    var a = [d1, d2, d3];
    datetime.dtdelta.reorder.apply(null, a);

There is no native support for reverse sorting. You can always reverse the
result, though:

    var res = datetime.dtdelta.reorder(d1, d2, d3);
    res.reverse()

_New in 0.3.0:_ This method no longer uses `#delta()` internally, so
overloading the `#delta()` method will not change its behavior.


#### `#isBefore(d, d1)` <a href="api-isbefore"></a>

Returns `true` is `d` is before `d1`. Note that if the objects represent the
same time, the method will return `false`.


#### `#isAfter(d, d1)` <a href="api-isafter"></a>

Returns `true` if `d` is after `d1`. Note that if the objects rerpresent the
same time, the method will return `false`.


#### `#isBetween(d, d1, d2)` <a href="api-isbetween"></a>

Returns `true` if `d` is between `d1` and `d2` (and not equal to either `d1` or
`d2`). Note that the order of `d1` and `d2` does not matter.


#### `#isDateBefore(d, d1)` <a href="api-isdatebefore"><a>

Same as [`#isBefore()`](#api-isbefore) but ignores the time differences.


#### `#isDateAfter(d, d1)` <a href="api-isdateafter"><a>

Same as [`#isAfter()`](#api-isafter) but ignores the time differences.


#### `#isDateBetween(d, d1, d2)` <a href="api-isdatebetween"></a>

Sale as [`#isBetween()`](#api-isbetween) but ignores the time differences.


#### `#isLeapYear(d)` <a href="api-isleapyear"></a>

Returns `true` if `d` object is in a leap year.


### `datetime.format`

This submodule contains methods related to formatting dates.


#### `#strftime(d, sformat)` <a name="api-strftime"></a>

Formats date and time. The `d` argument is a JavaScript `Date` object, and
`sformat` is an arbitrary  string containing the formatting tokens (see
[Formatting tokens](#formatting-tokens)).

This method is aliased as `datetime.strftime` for convenience.

Example:

    var d = new Date(2013, 8, 21, 12, 10, 32)
    datetime.strftime(d, 'The date is %D %B %Y');
    // returns 'The date is 21 September 2013'


#### `#isoformat(d)` <a name="api-isoformat"></a>

Shortcut for formatting using ISO format. You can change the ISO format you are
going to be using by changing the [`ISO_FORMAT`](#const-isoformat) variable.

The date is internally converted to UTC before formatting, so the resulting
timestamp is always in UTC regardless of your platform's local time zone.

This method is aliased as `datetime.isoformat` for convenience.


### `datetime.parse`

This submodule contains methods for parsing dates and times.


#### `#strptime(s, sformat)` <a name="api-strptime"></a>

Parses date and time. This method will parse a string `s` containing a date
and/or time formatted as `sformat`. The `format` string is similar to the one
used in `#strftime()` except that it uses a subset of formatting tokens (see
[Parsing tokens](#parsing-tokens)).

This method is aliased as `datetime.strptime` for convenience.

Example:

    var s = 'The date is 21 September 2013'
    datetime.strptime(s, 'The date is %D %B %Y')
    // returns Date(2013, 8, 21, 0, 0, 0, 0)


#### `#isoparse(s)` <a name="api-isoparse"></a>

Shortcut for parsing a string using ISO format. You can change the ISO format
you are going to be using by changing the [`ISO_FORMAT`](#const-isoformat)
variable.

The input string is considered to represent a date and time in UTC and is
compensated for time zone difference between UTC and platform's local time
zone. The output date time object will always be in local time.

This method is alias as `datetime.strptime` for convenience.


## `datetime.utils` <a name="api-utils"></a>

TODO


## Variables <a name="const"></a>

Some of DatetimeJS's behavior and output can be customized by changing the
internal variables. 

The internal variables are all exposed through the`datetime` module. This is
done intentionally for customization purposes.

To get or set a variable simple use it as `datetime` property:

    datetime.DY = ['su', 'mo', 'tu', 'we', 'th', 'fr', 'sa'];


### `DATE_MS` <a name="const-datems"></a>

Default is 86400000. Number of milliseconds in a day. Changing this _will_
generally lead to weird behavior, but you're free to do it if you know what you
are doing.


### `REGEXP_CHARS` <a name="const-regexpchars"></a>

An array of regexp characters that the parser will escape before parsing. By
default, these are the following:

    ^ $ [ ] ( ) . { } + * ? |


### `MONTHS` <a name="const-months"></a>

Array containing full month names. Default is English month names.


### `MNTH` <a name="const-mnth"></a>

Array containing three-letter abbreviation of month names. Default is
abbreviated English month names.


### `DAYS` <a name="const-days"></a>

Array containing full English week day names.


### `DY` <a name="const-dy"></a>

Array containing abbreviated three-letter English week day names.


### `AM` <a name="const-am"></a>

The abbreviated ante-meridiem. By default it's 'a.m.'.


### `PM` <a name="const-pm"></a>

The abbreviated post-meridiem. By default it's 'p.m.'.


### `WEEK_START` <a name="const-weekstart"></a>

Numeric week day on which week starts, where 0 is Sunday. By default, it's 0
(Sunday).


### `FORMAT_TOKENS` <a name="const-formattokens"</a>

This variable is an object, that maps [formatting tokens](#formatting-tokens)
to formatting functions. 

Each formatting function is applied to the date object being formatted and
returns a string representing the value of its token. 

To add new tokens, simply add a new key to this object that represents the
token (it will be used directly in a regexp, so make sure any special
characters are escaped), and assign a function that will do the formatting. The
`this` inside the function represents the date object.

For example, let's add a token '%o' that will return a date in ordinal format:

    datetime.FORMAT_TOKENS['%o'] = function() {
        var date = this.getDate().toString();
        if (['11', '12', '13'].indexOf(date) >= 0) {
            return date + 'th';
        }
        switch (date.slice(-1)) {
            case '1': return date + 'st';
            case '2': return date + 'nd';
            case '3': return date + 'rd';
            default: return date + 'th';
        }
    };

    var d1 = new Date(2013, 8, 1);
    var d2 = new Date(2013, 8, 2);
    var d3 = new Date(2013, 8, 3);
    var d4 = new Date(2013, 8, 15);

    console.log(datetime.strftime(d1, 'On %o'));
    console.log(datetime.strftime(d2, 'On %o'));
    console.log(datetime.strftime(d3, 'On %o'));
    console.log(datetime.strftime(d4, 'On %o'));

    // On 1st
    // On 2nd
    // On 3rd
    // On 4th

As you can see, you are not really limited to standard tokens for formatting.
Developers can use this feature to add tokens that are specific to the 
application as well, not just date formatting in general (e.g., output an
entire block of HTML depending on the date's value).

Note that tokens are not limited to 2 characters nor do they have to start with
a percent character. They are case sensitive, though.

(If you are wondering why this seemingly very useful token isn't included by
default, it's because it's English only, and DatetimeJS is supposed to b easy
to localize.)


### `PARSE_RECIPES` <a name="const-parserrecipes"></a>

This variable is a [`FORMAT_TOKENS`](#const-formattokens) counterpart used for
parsing. Again, each token is a key on this object, and it maps to a function
that performs the parsing.

The parsing function must return an object with two keys. The `re` key contains
the regexp fragment that matches values for the given token, and the `fn` key
contains a function that transforms a `meta` object later used by the parser to
construct a date object. 

The meta object has following properties:

    meta.year // full integer year
    meta.month // 0-indexed month
    meta.date // integer date (as in day of month)
    meta.hour // integer hour in 12- or 24-hour format
    meta.minute // integer minute
    meta.second // integer second
    meta.millisecond // integer millisecond (0 to 999)
    meta.timeAdjust // for 12-hour hour format adjust for PM by adding 12 hours
    meta.teimzone // the time zone offset in minutes (-720 to +720)

Each parsing function will modify the meta object with its own data. You can
also read the data off the meta object, but you should keep in mind the order
in which parsing functions are executed since you will only be able to read the
data added by the previous parse functions. The order in which functions are
run is determined by the order in which tokens appear in the format string.

The regular expression fragment must have all its backslashes escaped. So,
instead of typing `'\d'`, you must type `'\\d'`.

_New in 0.3.1:_ After minor fixes to the way [variables](#variables) are used
internally, it is finally possible to add new parse recipes.

Let's demonstrate writing a parse function by adding a parse function of the
new token we've added in the [previous section](#const-formattokens).

    datetime.PARSE_RECIPES['%o'] = function() {
        return {
            re: '31st|30th|20th|1\\dth|2?(?:1st|2nd|3rd|[4-9]th)',
            fn: function(s, meta) {
                meta.date = parseInt(s.slice(0, -2), 10);
            }
        };
    };

    var s1 = 'December 1st, 2012'
    var s2 = 'April 22nd, 2003'
    var s3 = 'January 11th, 2014'
    var format = '%B %o, %Y'

    console.log(datetime.strptime(s1, format));
    console.log(datetime.strptime(s2, format));
    console.log(datetime.strptime(s3, format));

And yes, I know the regexp isn't particularly clever, but it's generally a good
idea to have a regexp that will match only what it needs to.

(If you are wondering why this seemingly very useful token isn't included by
default, it's because it's English only, and DatetimeJS is supposed to b easy
to localize.)

### `ISO_FORMAT` <a name="const-isoformat"></a>

Default is `'%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%f'`. You can change it to whatever you like. Some
of the other common forms are:

 + `'%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%S'`
 + `'%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%f%z'`
 + `'%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%S%z'`
 + `'%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%fZ'`
 + `'%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M%z'`

This variable is used by [`#isoformat()`](#api-isoformat) and
[`#isoparse()`](#api-isoparse) methods.

## Formatting tokens <a name="formatting-tokens"></a>

The following tokens are recognized by `datetime.strftime`:

 + %a - Short week day name (e.g. 'Sun', 'Mon'...)
 + %A - Long week day name (e.g., 'Sunday', 'Monday'...)
 + %b - Short month name (e.g., 'Jan', 'Feb'...)
 + %B - Full month name (e.g., 'January', 'February'...)
 + %c - Locale-formatted date and time (platform-dependent)
 + %d - Zero-padded date (e.g, 02, 31...)
 + %D - Non-zero-padded date (e.g., 2, 31...)
 + %f - Zero-padded decimal seconds (e.g., 04.23, 23.50)
 + %H - Zero-padded hour in 24-hour format (e.g., 8, 13, 0...)
 + %i - Non-zero-padded hour in 12-hour format (e.g., 8, 1, 12...)
 + %I - Zero-padded hour in 12-hour format (e.g., 08, 01, 12...)
 + %j - Zero-padded day of year (e.g., 002, 145, 364...)
 + %m - Zero-padded month (e.g., 01, 02...)
 + %M - Zero-padded minutes (e.g., 01, 12, 59...)
 + %n - Non-zero-padded month (e.g., 1, 2...)
 + %N - Non-zero-padded minutes (e.g., 1, 12, 59)
 + %p - AM/PM (a.m. and p.m.)
 + %s - Non-zero-padded seconds (e.g., 1, 2, 50...)
 + %S - Zero-padded seconds (e.g., 01, 02, 50...)
 + %r - Milliseconds (e.g., 1, 24, 500...)
 + %w - Numeric week day where 0 is Sunday (e.g., 0, 1...)
 + %y - Zero-padded year without the century part (e.g., 01, 13, 99...)
 + %Y - Full year (e.g., 2001, 2013, 2099...)
 + %z - Timezone in +HHMM or -HHMM format (e.g., +0200, -0530)
 + %x - Locale-formatted date (platform dependent)
 + %X - Locale-formatted time (platform dependent)
 + %% - Literal percent character %

If you are coming from Python, you might be used to using `%f` to mean
microseconds. The same token in DatetimeJS has a different meaning (float
seconds).

## Parsing tokens <a name="parsing-tokens"></a>

The following tokens are recognized when parsing with `datetime.strptime`:

 + %b - Short month name (e.g., 'Jan', 'Feb'...)
 + %B - Full month name (e.g., 'January', 'February'...)
 + %d - Zero-padded date (e.g, 02, 31...)
 + %D - Non-zero-padded date (e.g., 2, 31...)
 + %H - Zero-padded hour in 24-hour format (e.g., 8, 13, 0...)
 + %i - Non-zero-padded hour in 12-hour format (e.g., 8, 1, 12...)
 + %I - Zero-padded hour in 12-hour format (e.g., 08, 01, 12...)
 + %m - Zero-padded month (e.g., 01, 02...)
 + %M - Zero-padded minutes (e.g., 01, 12, 59...)
 + %n - Non-zero-padded month (e.g., 1, 2...)
 + %N - Non-zero-padded minutes (e.g., 1, 12, 59)
 + %p - AM/PM (a.m. and p.m.)
 + %s - Non-zero-padded seconds (e.g., 1, 2, 50...)
 + %S - Zero-padded seconds (e.g., 01, 02, 50...)
 + %r - Milliseconds (e.g., 1, 24, 500...)
 + %y - Zero-padded year without the century part (e.g., 01, 13, 99...)
 + %Y - Full year (e.g., 2001, 2013, 2099...)
 + %z - Time zone in +HHMM or -HHMM format or 'Z' (e.g., +1000, -0200)

The `%z` token behaves slightly differently when parsing date and time strings.
In addition to formats that strftime outputs, it also supports 'Z', which
allows parsing of ISO timestamps.

## Running unit tests <a name="running-unit-tests"></a>

For in-browser testing, simply open the `index.html` located in the `tests`
directory. 

For NodeJS, run:

    mocha tests/*.js

## Known issues

It is not possible to override some of the internal variables that are exposed
thorugh the module. This will be fixed in 0.4.0. There are currently no known
workarounds.

## Reporting bugs

Before reporting a bug, please make sure all tests are passing. If tests are
not passing, please include information about failing tests with your bug
report, even if it doesn't seem relevant.

Report all your issues (related to this library, of course) to the [GitHub
issue tracker](https://github.com/foxbunny/datetimejs/issues).
